My name is Wilfredo Sanchez
Vega and I am here to talk about
the Darwin Calendar Server which
is also known as the iCal Server.
And I'm pretty jazzed up to be
up here in WWC talking about new
products again and open source things
so hope you're as excited as I am.
The Darwin Calendar Server is
Apple's calendar sharing solution.
So we've been getting a lot of requests
for years and years now about why it is
that Mac OS X Server fills almost every
need that you've got and wouldn't it be
swell if it had some kind of calendar
solution and finally we've got something.
Thank you.
[Transcript missing]
So to speak about CalDAV and
iCalendar and so on is Cyrus Daboo
who is a colleague of mine
on the Mac OS X server team.
And Cyrus is one of the authors of
CalDAV specifications so he's pretty
well suited to take it from here.
Okay, thank you Wilfredo.
I'm Cyrus Daboo and I'm here to talk
to you about two main topics today.
The first of these is going to be a
brief introduction to the calendaring
and scheduling standards that
Wilfredo mentioned a short while ago.
And then I'm going to go on and
give you a little bit more detail
about the CalDAV specification.
So first of all, iCalendar.
Well, iCalendar is a data format
that's defined by the
Internet Engineering Task Force RFC 2445
specification.
This was actually originally
published back in 1998,
so it's been around
for quite a while now.
And there are many products that
actually implement this standard
and they allow you to import and
export data in iCalendar format,
etc.
And of course, iCal has been able to
do that since day one.
The ITIP specification,
ITIP stands for iCalendar
Transport Independent Protocol,
is a specification that defines how you
can use the iCalendar data to actually
carry out scheduling operations between
multiple parties in a calendaring system.
So ITIP defines a set of methods
and types that define how people
actually do scheduling processes.
So it defines certain roles for people,
an organizer, an attendees and actions
that they can perform.
So an organizer can send out
a request to the attendees,
it's an invitation.
The attendees can look at that,
can decide whether they want to attend or
not and they can send back their replies
to the organizer who can then aggregate
and update all of that information
for the other attendees as well.
Together, these two standards basically
provide the overall standard
for calendaring and scheduling.
And again,
a number of other products already
support ITIP through the email
mechanism that Wilfredo mentioned,
which is the IMIP profile.
So it's a very simple way to do that.
But what has been lacking until
now has really been a formal way to
do an access protocol to actually
access the data from the client in a
typical client-server architecture.
So that's going to be CalDAV,
which I'll talk about a little later on.
So let's look a little bit
at what iCalendar gives us.
So iCalendar basically
defines a set of events,
tasks, and journal entries in
the iCalendar data format.
The start and end times which you
need in any calendaring specification
can be specified in various formats.
So you can have floating time events,
you can have times that are fixed
to UDC and you can have times
that have full time zone support.
And since a lot of us these days
travel across multiple time zones,
having full time zone support in your
product is actually very important.
And we also need to take care of
things like daylight savings times,
transitions and so forth.
So time zone information encodes
all of that for us in iCalendar.
Another thing we need to be able
to do with calendaring data is
to be able to have events that
recur over a period of time.
So in iCalendar you can actually
define a set of recurrence rules which
actually can be very sophisticated.
And what you also need to be able to do
with recurrences and recurrence patterns
is to define exceptions to those.
So sometimes you may have a meeting which
normally takes place on a Wednesday but
then one particular week you may
need to cancel that for some reason.
Or another week you may need to
actually move it to the Thursday.
So the iCalendar data format needs
to be able to allow you to specify
exceptions to recurrences as well.
Since we want to do scheduling,
we also need a way to specify attendee
data so that we can invite people.
We can determine the time zone.
We can determine what their status is.
So an attendee will be able
to specify whether they've
accepted a particular invitation,
whether they've declined that invitation,
or they may want to delegate
their presence in a particular
meeting to another attendee.
So all of that can be done
within the iCalendar data format.
So let's look at iCalendar
in a little bit more detail.
I'm going to show some of the syntax
that you will see in an iCalendar file.
So iCalendar defines a set
of top level component types.
So there's a VEVENT component
which defines events.
There's a VTODO component for tasks.
There's a VTIMEZONE component that
encodes time zone information for the
different time zones across the world.
And that also includes
daylight savings times rules.
And don't forget that those are
changing next year in the US,
so be careful of that.
We also have VALARM components
which are usually embedded and
attached to VEVENTS and VTODOS.
And these let you specify alarms that
can be triggered a certain time before
or after an event is due to start.
The VJOURNAL component,
well back in 1998,
blogs were not being used
or were not really around.
And VJOURNAL was kind of
designed as an equivalent to a
kind of a blogging mechanism.
It's just a way, you know,
typically if you have your, you know,
the old days when you had, you know,
your diary that you'd scribble in,
this is what the journal
entry was supposed to be.
It's a way of taking notes during
a meeting and just putting those
on your calendar and tagging
them with a date and time.
Journals have not been particularly
implemented widely in products,
so that particular aspect of
iCalendar hasn't been used very much.
Though there are some specialized
uses of it that are actually
beginning to appear recently.
The VFREE BUSY component is a way for
you to specify busy time information
or to block out time on your calendar
without actually specifying exactly what
it is you're doing during that time.
It's also a way for you to transport
free and busy information to other
people just to let them know that you're
busy for a particular block of time,
again without actually giving
away information about what it
is that you might actually be
doing at that particular time.
So let's take a look at iCalendar syntax.
I mean, these days you can pretty much
go to the Internet and pull
down an iCalendar file from many
different calendar sharing sites.
So you'll pull down a file which will
typically have this .ics extension.
And if you open that up in a
text editor and look at it,
you're going to see something
that looks a little bit like this.
So usually at the top of the file,
you're going to have this
begin vCalendar statement.
And at the very end,
you're going to have an
end vCalendar statement.
Within that,
you're going to have begin vEvent,
end vEvent, begin vToDo, end vToDo.
So the top-level object,
the vCalendar object,
can contain many of these
different component objects,
vEvents, vToDos, vJournals, et cetera.
Within each of the actual
components themselves,
there are a set of properties that
actually define the specific information
about that particular component.
And properties have a name,
a set of parameters, which are optional,
and a value.
So there's an example of a property.
Here, which is actually the
start time property.
And the name of this one is dtStart.
It has a parameter which
includes a name and a value,
the name being tzId and the value
of that parameter being usEastern.
This happens to be the time zone that
this particular time is relative to.
And then there's a value
for this property as well.
So if we take a look at an
entire iCalendar file example,
this is what you would typically see.
So the entire iCalendar object
is specified between the
begin vCalendar and vCalendar.
Within that, in this case,
we have two components
in this particular file.
One is a vTimeZone,
the other is a vEvent.
And within each of those components,
we have the properties that actually
describe the component information.
So let's go on and take a little
bit detailed look at recurrences
because recurrence is usually
the biggest problem that people
run into when they're actually
looking at the iCal specification.
It's one of the harder aspects and has
been an area where interoperability
has been somewhat dubious of late.
But there are efforts underway to
actually clarify the standards and fix
some of the problems that have actually
been observed in the wild between
products interoperating and so on.
And right now the IETF actually has a
Calcify working group that is actually
looking at revising these standards
that have been around for quite a
while and producing updated versions
of these documents that fix most of
the known interoperability problems.
So you can make events occur more than
once through the use of recurrence rules.
There are two ways of typically
specifying recurrences.
One is as basically a set of
fixed dates and the other is
through a use of a pattern.
Now patterns can either be bounded,
so I can have a fixed set of dates
set to occur for five times or
they can be unbounded as you would
typically want to do for anniversaries,
your birthday or holidays, etc.
Simple patterns might be every
Monday or every day for five times.
There are examples of the
iCalendar syntax for both of those.
But let's look at some
examples in more detail.
So let's say I want to specify
a recurrence pattern which
is every day for five times.
The way we do that in iCalendar
is we have this RRule property.
Within that we specify a
frequency that says daily,
so that's our interval.
And then we limit that to five
instances with this count property.
Another example, every Monday in March.
Again, we're going to specify this
as a daily recurring meeting,
but now we're going to say only
on Mondays and additionally
we're going to say only in March.
So that gives us every Monday in March.
Now with recurrences,
you usually need to specify a start time,
which is the very first
instance of the recurrence set.
So in this case,
I'm going to specify a birthday.
So the actual start time is going to be
the very first birthday you might have.
And the R rule is just going
to say repeat this every year.
The other way of specifying
recurrences is as a set of fixed dates.
So if you have a recurring event
that's maybe too complex for the actual
recurrence rules that iCal specifies,
you may need to set that up
as a specific set of dates.
So an example of this would
be the Easter holiday,
which has a very complicated set of rules
for determining when it actually occurs.
And the iCalendar R rule syntax
isn't actually able to cover
all of those possibilities.
So in that case,
you could actually use R dates.
And in this particular example,
we have just a simple set of three dates,
which are three days during
August that we wanted to specify.
Now you can do more complex
things with iCalendar recurrences.
So this is an example of a complex
pattern that iCalendar enables.
So I'm going to use
the example of payday,
which I'm going to define as
the last weekday of the month.
And hopefully everybody has at least one
of these on their calendar every month.
So with this particular rule,
we're going to let it occur monthly.
But what we're going to do
is specify that the rule only
occurs on the last Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday and Friday in
any particular month.
And then we're going to use this
by set pos element to actually pick
the last one of those in the set
that's generated by those instances.
So the recurrence rule expansion
process is actually quite complicated.
There are a whole set of
elements that can occur.
Within a rule, in some cases,
those elements can actually
expand the set of recurrences for
a particular frequency interval.
In other cases,
they can actually restrict
the set of occurrences,
as we saw with the by set pos,
which restricts you from a possibility
of the five weekdays down to
the one that actually matches
the recurrence that you want.
So actually calculating these is not
a trivial process and actually takes a
fair bit of CPU power and effort to do.
It's good to know that there are
quite a lot of There are a number of
open source iCalendar libraries out
there that actually let you parse and
generate and interpret iCalendar data.
So if you need to incorporate this
technology in your own products,
you can certainly look at those.
In addition to being able to specify
just the plain recurrence patterns,
as I mentioned before,
you also need to be able
to specify exceptions.
One type of exception is an exclusion.
So in this example,
we're going to specify every
week on Monday for five weeks,
except that we're going to eliminate
the third instance of that.
So in this case,
we just specify the starting
Monday for the recurrence set.
We have an R rule which
specifies weekly for five times,
then we use a special X state
property to exclude the third
one of those from that set.
Another type of overridden
recurrence is the exception.
This is a situation where
we actually going to,
rather than eliminate
a particular meeting,
we're actually going to change
it from one time to another.
So in this case,
I have an example where I've got a
meeting that's taking place on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday.
Now what I want to do is move
the Wednesday meeting to a
different time on Thursday.
Now in iCalendar,
the way we do this is to actually add a
new VEvent component that defines this
overridden instance on Thursday and link
it back to the original component that
defines the original set of occurrences.
And with the iCalendar semantics
defined by the specification,
the iCalendar clients will know that
that overridden instance overrides the
original one from the master instance
and will give you the correct view
of your events with that overridden
instance in the appropriate place.
But it's worth noting that
particularly when it comes to CalDAV,
a CalDAV server, as we're going to see,
needs to understand recurrences
and iCalendar data because it
has to do a certain amount of
iCalendar processing on the server.
So in addition to the client having
to understand this information,
the server needs to do so too.
So let's actually move on
and take a look at CalDAV.
CalDAV
So why did we need CalDAV?
Well,
there were previous attempts to define a
calendar access protocol within the IETF.
The original CAP protocol,
which stood for Calendar Access Protocol,
was a completely new protocol
that was designed to do as much of
calendaring and scheduling as possible.
As a result,
it actually turned out to be way too
complex and way too difficult for
most people to want to implement.
So there was very little interest
and buy-in from vendors to actually
implement this specification.
And of course, if you have a standard
that no one implements,
well,
it's not really useful to anyone at all.
The other problem with this is of
course calendaring and scheduling
itself is actually complex.
I'm only touching on a very limited
view of what's actually here.
If you actually go and
read the specifications,
you'll see the level of
complexity that's there.
Particularly things get very complex
when you start dealing with multi-party
scheduling where you do have recurring
meetings over a period of time.
You do have exceptions to those meetings.
You need to invite different
people to certain instances of a
recurring event and not others.
There's a lot of complexity there.
What we wanted to do was to
try and remove from the access
protocol the complexity of the
protocol or transport layer itself.
Why not build on an
existing transport protocol?
Obviously,
HTTP is a good transport protocol.
It's used for a number of
different applications.
HTTP was a good choice,
but we needed to be able to do
a little bit more with that.
As Wilfredo mentioned,
we need to be able to author
calendar events online.
We wanted to be able to do a lot
of that on the server as well as
just retrieve them from the server.
WebDAV is the authoring specification,
and we wanted to utilize that.
Then, of course,
we want to stick with iCalendar
and iTIP itself so that we can
leverage the knowledge and the
libraries that people have already
developed for iCalendar and iTIP.
So HTTP, again an ITF standard.
Most people will see HTTP because
that's the way you browse the internet.
But it's also used in other applications.
Web dev, as I said, SOAP, XMLRPC,
et cetera.
WebDAV adds a structured and editable
data model to HTTP specifically
to enable collaborative authoring
of documents on an HTTP server.
So one of the key things that it
adds is this concept of collections,
which is the equivalent of a
directory in your file system.
It allows you to group resources
or documents into subfolders on the
server and organize the hierarchy
of resources on the server.
So WebDAV added this MKCOL method to
allow you to actually create collections.
It provides a way for managing resources
by adding copy and move methods,
which lets you move or copy resources
between different collections.
It adds a mechanism of allowing
you to add metadata to resources
that are on the server.
So typically the server will
store metadata on resources
such as the last modified time,
the creation stamp, the owner,
HTTP specific information
such as the email.
It adds a way for you to
add tags to a resource,
which is the e-tag of the resource,
which is a synchronization token
that you can use with HTTP.
But clients can also define
their own properties,
which they can store on the
server for information that they
need for their own purposes.
So if you need to have a property
that adds tags to a resource,
you can add that through
a WebDAV property.
In addition to allow multi-authoring
of resources on the server,
you need a way for one user to
lock a resource to prevent another
user from coming on and coming
in and trying to edit that and
maybe overwriting their changes.
So again, WebDAV defined new lock and
unlock methods to help with that.
In addition,
there's another specification that
adds access control to WebDAV.
And access control is really
the key to allowing end users
to manage their own documents.
Now, typically with an Apache server,
you can manage access control
by going into the server and
editing your .htaccess file and
giving people privileges that way.
But typically,
it's only the system admin who's
going to be able to do that.
What we want is a way for users through
the HTTP protocol to actually manage
sharing of the documents themselves.
So that way,
I can go in and grant Wilfredo
access to a particular
document I have on the server.
And I can do that directly
through the WebDAV HTTP protocol.
So that's what the WebDAV access
control protocol gives us.
There's also the version
control specification,
which allows resources that
are stored on the server to
be put under version control.
So a full history of all of those
resources is stored on the server.
You can look at previous versions
of a particular resource.
You can update resources and do merge.
You can do merge and so on.
And in fact,
the version control features are used
by some source code control systems,
such as Subversion today.
So let's actually look at CalDAV itself.
So CalDAV is a calendar access protocol.
It's designed to address real
calendaring requirements.
So one of our primary goals when
going into the process of writing
a specification is to actually
take a look at how people are
using calendaring and scheduling
today in the proprietary products,
custom systems that have been built
and to try and leverage some of that
knowledge to build the specification
in a way that's actually going
to address a lot of the use cases
and requirements that people have.
in the real world.
Right now we have two specifications.
There's the calendar access
protocol which allows you to read,
write and search calendar
data on the server.
This particular specification is in
the final IETF approval process and
we expect to see it published as
an RFC in a couple of months or so.
Then we have the calendar
schedule specification.
This enables the process of
scheduling on a CalDAV server.
So it allows you to exchange
scheduling messages between
users on the same server.
This particular document is close
to IETF last call and again we
don't expect there to be any major
changes in this and in fact we,
our server and the iCal product
have both implemented the current
version of that specification.
In addition to this,
we're expecting to have another
specification that defines how you do
server-to-server scheduling operations.
So we need a way to be able to schedule
between different organizations
that may have different servers,
different types of servers even.
So the third document in this
series will be a document
that defines how to do that.
One of the things we have to be very
careful of with the server-to-server
protocol is ensuring that we do
this in a secure and safe manner.
Obviously, we want to avoid the horrible
threat of having calendar spam
appearing on people's calendars.
Unfortunately, in this day and age,
it's more than likely that
that's going to happen.
So we need to take precautions up front
to help prevent that type of thing.
A lot of the work on
CalDAV and the requirements
for server-to-server protocol,
etc., is actually being carried
out under the auspices of the
Calendaring and Scheduling Consortium,
which you've heard a fair
bit about this week already.
So if you're interested
in a lot of this work,
you know,
please try and join in in the CalConnect
Consortium and help us define the
requirements and needs that you may have.
And in particular, we're not just looking
for developers here.
We actually want end users who have their
own requirements and needs to actually
come and give us input as to what
they need in a protocol such as this.
So who's actually doing CalDAV right now?
Well obviously apart from Apple,
there are a bunch of other vendors,
both commercial, open source,
and education sites that have
been developing and have released
CalDAV products in various forms.
These range from clients and servers
to a free busy aggregator that sits
on top of a proprietary system.
So let's look at CalDAV in
a little bit more detail.
So in CalDAV, calendars are actually
represented by WebDAV collections.
CalDAV actually defines a new
MK calendar method that actually allows
a calendar client to create a special
calendar collection on the server.
The events and tasks in the
calendar are stored as individual
resources within that calendar,
with the exception that any events that
represent a set of recurring events--
so in that previous example I had of
exceptions where you added a particular
event that was related to the master
recurrent set-- those two events,
the master and this exception,
would actually be stored in a single
resource on the CalDAV server.
And that's just there for convenience,
because typically you're going to want
to download both of those together when
you actually want to process that event.
So let's look at a typical
server repository layout.
So on a WebDAV server,
in this case a CalDAV server
that we have here,
we're going to have two
main areas on the server.
The first of these is going to
be the principles hierarchy.
This is the location where
accounting information about users,
groups and resources
is going to be stored.
Then we're going to have a calendars
portion of the hierarchy which is
where the actual calendar data lives.
So with the
WebDAV Access Control Extension,
every user on the system is
represented by a principal resource.
So in this case,
we have principal resources for Cyrus,
Chris and Wilfredo.
These principal resources are the
identifiers that you actually use
in the Access Control Extension to
specify who gets access to
which particular resources.
In addition to be able to
specifying individual users,
of course you want to be able
to specify groups of users.
And again,
the principal resources that define
groups allow you to use those in access
control so you can grant rights for
a particular group to read a resource.
And all of the users who are members of
that group obviously inherit the ability
to read or write based on the privileges.
Now in calendaring,
we also need to include non-human
resources in the calendaring process.
So rooms, printers,
all of these need to be bookable
as part of the invitation.
So again,
we will have principles related to
those particular types of resources.
Within the calendar data hierarchy,
again,
we will have three subgroups for users,
groups and resources.
Within a particular subgroup,
we're going to have the calendar home
directory for each particular principle.
Here we have calendar homes for Cyrus,
Chris and Wilfredo.
In this example,
Chris has actually got two calendars
within his calendar collection.
CalDAV does allow you to have as many
different calendars as you want under
your own calendar home directory or
you can create calendars in public
hierarchies if they're set up as well.
In this example, Chris has two events
in his work calendar.
It's worth remembering here that we're
still dealing with an HTTP server.
So every one of these resources
and collections is individually
addressable by an HTTP URL.
So at any time,
you can just even pull up a web
browser and just browse this entire
CalDAV hierarchy assuming you
have permissions to look at the
various portions of that hierarchy.
One of the key components of the
CalDAV protocol is the other reports.
The reports are the way that
you actually get access to the
calendar data in a smart way.
So for reports,
we use the WebDAV report method and this
gives us a way to do calendar specific
queries on the data on the server.
Reports typically take an XML request
body and return an XML response.
CalDAV defines three types of reports.
There's the calendar query report,
which allows you to query
calendar objects on the server
that match certain criteria.
And I'm going to go into this
in more detail in a minute.
There's the calendar multi-get report,
which allows you to get a whole
set of events or tasks from the
server in one single request.
So rather than having to do
multiple requests for each
of the individual events in a
particular calendar collection,
you can ask the server to give
you all of those in one go.
And that just saves you.
So you can do a little bit
of bandwidth and round trips,
which is particularly
important for mobile devices.
Another report is the free busy query.
With the free busy query,
it's possible to grant someone the
right to get free busy information
about your particular calendar without
giving them the right to actually
see the data in that calendar.
So I can grant Wilfredo the right to run
a free busy report on my work calendar,
but he won't be able to,
if I don't give him the right
to actually read that calendar,
he won't be able to see.
The details of the events,
he will just get information that says,
I'm busy from this start
time to this end time,
et cetera.
So let's look at the query report
in a little bit more detail because
this is the report that most
clients are going to want to use for
their day-to-day usage of CalDAV.
So with the query report,
clients can specify a
set of search criteria.
You can match the text in a particular
value in the calendar data on the server.
So you can find events, for example,
that contain WWDC in their description.
You can match by a time range,
so you can find all events that
are on your calendar this week.
You can match by
particular component types,
so you can find just events
or just to-dos or events that
only contain alarms and so on.
In addition,
the client can actually specify
what gets returned by the server.
So the client can
request that the server,
in addition to returning
the calendar data,
it also returns WebDAV properties
that may be necessary to help
interpret that information.
The client can also request either
the entire calendar data be returned
or only parts of the calendar data.
Now, it's worth remembering that with
the iCalendar specification,
you can include attachments
in your calendar data that
you store on the server.
Of course,
these attachments these days can be
very large if you're storing large
keynote presentations or pages,
documents, and so on.
So from an efficiency standpoint,
you don't want to have to keep
downloading attachment data when
all you really want is the start
and end time of a particular event.
And CalNav allows you to do partial
fetches of the data on the server.
In addition,
it's possible for the client to
ask the CalNav server to actually
expand recurrences on its behalf.
So again, we might have mobile devices
that are on the server,
but we don't want to have to do that.
So again, we might have mobile devices
that are on the server,
but we don't want to have to do that.
Let's actually look at what one of these
reports might look like over the wire.
So this is again a typical
HTTP request response type process.
So here we're going to be
sending an HTTP report request.
The report, as I said before,
is going to take XML data
in the request body.
The request itself is going to include
XML that says find events on my calendar.
And in this particular case,
we're looking for events
that occur between a specific
start and end time range.
So the response from the server,
this is going to be a
multi-status response.
Multi-status is a special response
defined in WebDAV that allows the
server to return information about
multiple resources in a single response.
So in this case,
we actually have a single matching
component where we have XML data
being returned and within that
we have the actual iCalendar data
that the client requested and
that matched the search criteria.
In this case, one event was found.
Let's look at the second part of CalDAV,
which is the scheduling portion.
What we wanted to do with
CalDAV scheduling is support all of
the modes that the ITIP specification
defines for carrying out scheduling.
This requires, amongst other things,
this requires the server to
really understand the concept
of calendar user addresses,
which is the means that you
actually use to identify users on
the calendaring system and target
invitations at those particular users.
In addition,
iCalendar and ITIP define the roles
of an organizer and attendees.
So there's going to be a certain
amount of asymmetry in the protocol
depending on what your role is.
If you're an organizer,
there are certain processes you need
to go through and tasks you need
to do to initiate an invitation.
If you're an attendee,
there are certain steps you need
to take to process that invitation.
In addition to this,
we definitely need access control
and access privileges for scheduling.
You want to be able to control
who is able to invite you
to a particular meeting,
whether you reject invitations
from certain people.
You also want to be able to
delegate the ability for someone to
schedule meetings on your behalf.
So if you have an assistant who is
able to book meetings on your behalf,
you want to be able to grant them the
right to do that through the protocol.
And again, we've leveraged WebDAV access
control to allow you to do that.
So let's look at this in
a little bit more detail.
The CalDAV scheduling specification
defines for each user on the
CalDAV server an inbox and an
outbox collection that are actually
used during the scheduling process.
And to set the access control
privileges for determining who
can schedule with you and who's
able to schedule on your behalf,
you actually set access privileges on
the inbox and the outbox resources.
In addition to this,
we have a lot of different
ways to schedule meetings.
We have a lot of different
You can schedule meetings
with your friends,
you can schedule meetings
with your family,
with your friends,
you can schedule meetings
with your family,
with your friends.
So scheduling requests or
replies are deposited by the
organizer into their own outbox.
That triggers the server to actually
send the requests or invitations
to the intended recipients.
The organizer gets back an immediate
response from the server that says,
this particular invitation was delivered
successfully to the recipient's inbox.
The recipients themselves will
actually see those invitations
delivered to their own inboxes.
And in their own time,
they can pick up those invitations,
they can look at them,
they can process them,
they can determine how to respond,
and they can respond by depositing
their response in their own outbox,
and that gets routed
back to the organizer.
There is one exception to this,
and that is the case of
free/busy information.
When we were looking at the
calendar in the scheduling,
it was very clear that one of the biggest
pain points in the whole scheduling
process is actually determining free/busy
information because that's really the
first thing that people do when they're
actually putting together an invitation.
You need to know, you know,
when can I actually book this meeting?
What is a suitable time?
And the ability to look at people's
free/busy information in almost real time
was a very important key requirement.
So in order to enable that,
we defined the CalDAV scheduling
specification to return free/busy
information immediately to the end user.
So the server calculates this on
behalf of the organizer and returns
that information immediately.
And we'll see an example
of this in a minute.
So just graphically to represent
what happens in this process,
we have an organizer and an attendee.
The organizer adds the scheduling
request to their outbox.
The server sees this being delivered
to the outbox and takes copies of that
and puts that in each attendee's inbox.
At some later point,
the attendee will see
that in their inbox.
They'll be able to pick it up.
They'll be able to process it.
And if they need to send a reply,
they can add that reply
to their own outbox.
Again, the server spots this
new reply in the outbox,
picks it up and delivers it
to the organizer's inbox.
And the organizer can pick up that
reply and update their local copy
of the event with the new attendee
information that was provided.
Another way to look at this
is what happens when you
have more than one attendee.
So again,
we have an organizer that's sending
an invitation to the server.
In this case,
the invitation actually lists
four different attendees.
So again,
the server is going to pick that
up and deliver four copies of it to
each attendee's inbox on the server.
Each attendee in their own time
is going to be able to see those
invitations and they're going to be
able to send them back to the organizer.
And the organizer will get
four copies or four status,
four replies from each of the attendees.
They'll be able to update
their own copy of that.
They'll be able to push out updates
to other attendees to notify them
of the status change of other
participants in the event and so on.
This whole process is typically
called fan out in the calendaring
and scheduling terminology.
So let's take a quick look at our
scheduling request on the wire again.
So for schedule requests,
we actually use the HTTP post method.
And in this case, again,
we're targeting the
outbox of the organizer.
The request itself is
actually iCalendar data.
In the HTTP headers,
we include addressing information.
So this is the information about who
is the originator of the message,
which may differ from the person
who's organizing the message.
So if you have a delegate,
someone who's acting on your behalf,
they will be listed as the originator,
though you as the organizer
will be listed in the iCalendar
information as the organizer.
So in email terms,
you know that there's a
difference between the from
address and the sender address,
et cetera.
This is an equivalent type mechanism.
Within the actual iCalendar data,
we have an ITIP request.
In this case,
it's an ITIP event invitation.
And the invitation itself is
for dinner on August the 9th.
The reply that the organizer
gets back from the server,
again, it's going to be hopefully
an okay response.
Again, it's going to be XML data.
And encoded within that response is
going to be information about whether
the event was successfully delivered
to the attendee's inbox or not.
If the attendee had disabled
my right to schedule with them,
I would get a negative
response back at this point.
Luckily, in this case,
it was successfully delivered,
so you get a success response.
Let's take a look at the FreeBusy case,
which differs from the
invitation process.
So again, with FreeBusy,
we do a post request on the HTTP server.
Again, we provide iCalendar data.
Again,
we provide the addressing information.
This time, however,
we have an ITIP FreeBusy request.
And we're going to be asking the server
for the response to the freeBusy request.
Now,
the response we get back from the server
looks similar to what we got back before,
except that now the actual
iCalendar FreeBusy information
is included in that response.
So we don't need to wait for the
attendee to hit reply in their client.
The server automatically determines
the FreeBusy information for
that attendee and returns it in
virtually real time to the organizer.
And in this case,
the attendee was just busy for an hour.
So where are we with CalDAV today?
Well,
there's been a lot of interoperability
testing carried out between the various
people that have CalDAV products.
This actually started
back in January 2005,
and we've been holding about three
interrupts a year since then.
Again, it's been carried out under
the auspices of the Calendaring
and Scheduling Consortium.
The next event, interop event,
by the way,
is actually being hosted by Apple at
the end of September down in Cupertino.
There was a recent free busy
demonstration that was done,
again, put together by the
CalConnect organization.
And that actually showed
several different,
in some cases,
proprietary calendaring and
scheduling systems actually leveraging
CalDAV to do cross-organizational
free and busy lookups.
So CalDAV was effectively acting as
an aggregator for proprietary systems,
aggregating free busy information
from these and providing a standard
CalDAV interface for clients to actually
access that free busy information.
That demonstration was done about a month
and a half ago and was very successful.
And again,
we're going to be building on that
in terms of the server-to-server
protocol to actually build out this
new server-to-server specification.
Now, it's fair to say that
CalDAV is interesting.
It's really still in its infancy.
And there are certain key elements
of a true calendaring scheduling
system that are missing right now
that still need to be specified.
Obviously, as I discussed before,
we need to do this
server-to-server protocol.
In addition,
HTTP does not really have a way
for the server to notify the
client of changes on the server.
So we need a way to do asynchronous
notifications so that the client
doesn't have to continually poll
the server to look for changes.
So that's another element
that we need to specify.
And that's more important.
And we're going to be looking at
more of an HTTP issue as well.
So it's going to be done within
the HTTP community rather than
just the CalDAV community.
We also need a way to do smart and
efficient collection synchronization.
So again,
trying to minimize the bandwidth
and the data that clients need
to exchange with the server so
that we can be efficient on that.
And again,
this is looking at not just to benefit
desktop clients but also mobile clients.
But we really want to see a good adoption
of CalDAV in the mobile arena as well.
And the other thing that
we would like to see.
Is the ability to do partial
updates of resources.
Before when I described the
partial fetching of resources.
You could download part of an event and
avoid having to download the attachment.
But one thing we're lacking
is the ability to change,
say, just the start time of an event
without actually having to upload
the entire attachment along with it.
So again,
a way to do partial updates on an
HTTP server will be good as well.
So with that,
I would like to actually turn back to
Wilfredo and have him come up here.
And give you a.
an in-depth look at our CalDAV server.
Thanks Cyrus.
So now that we know all about how
to implement a calendar server,
fortunately you don't have to
go off and do it because we did
one for you and you can use it.
Again, the Darwin Calendar Server is
an HTTP server because you
have to be an HTTP server in
order to be a WebDAV server,
which it is also,
and you've got to be that in
order to be a CalDAV server,
which of course is the end goal.
Our server is written in Python.
It is based on the Twisted Framework and
it's configurable using Open Directory.
So let's get into some detail here.
Again, the server is written in Python.
It's a dynamic, flexible,
object-oriented programming language.
It's been very convenient for us to
code in this and hopefully you'll
be hearing a little more about that
tomorrow when Bill talks about how
you can write Cocoa applications
using Python and so on.
Leopard includes Python version 2.4,
which we're actually using in our server,
although it probably wouldn't be
too hard to backport it to 2.3.
A common question I'm getting when
I mention Python is what's the
performance of this scripting language,
right?
It's not C,
so it's not going to be super fast,
right?
And it turns out that actually
Python's not a bottleneck.
There are plenty of examples of
high-scale Python implementation,
such as like eGroups from way back
when and a bunch of things like that.
The particularly CPU-intensive
work is actually still done in C,
such as SSL handling,
which talks to the OpenSSL framework.
But we fully expect our server to scale
to moderate to large organizations.
We are not building something that you
could deploy as a Yahoo or a Google,
because, wow, that's hard.
But for your business,
we should be just fine.
Again, this is built using
the Twisted framework.
Twisted is an open source
networking framework and that's
of course written in Python.
It provides for us a lot of
functionality that we already
needed in order to get started.
And it implements a bunch of protocols
such as IMAP and POP3 and NetNews and
SSH and particularly of interest to us,
HTTP.
It's got a very active
development community.
What's interesting about
Twisted is that it's,
again, asynchronous,
but it does this without
using any threads.
So all the headaches of thread
management and the bugs and the endless
debugging that you do with threads,
we don't have to worry about
because we're not using threads.
But at the same time,
it can field multiple
requests at the same time.
So when you have a blocking operation,
such as you're going to write to
the network or you're going to read
from a file or you're going to do
something that's going to take a while,
rather than writing a method that
does that and then returns an answer,
what you do is you schedule that
operation and then you return a
promise to give the caller an answer.
So that's called a deferred object.
And a deferred object doesn't
necessarily know what data you
are going to read right away.
So as the caller,
you get back this object and then
you chain onto it a callback,
which once the answer is available,
that callback gets called and then you
can continue your processing from there.
So it's a somewhat different
way to write your software,
but it's actually fairly effective
at doing this asynchronous operation
without a whole lot of grief.
- Yeah.
It's actually pretty cool.
So Twisted Web 2 is a submodule
within Twisted that implements HTTP.
In particular,
it does it by modeling a resource as
an instantiated object so that whenever
you're going to field a request,
the server gets a request for some URL.
It figures out which resource is
responsible for handling that URL.
It instantiates that resource and then
it calls a method on that resource
which corresponds to the HTTP method
which was called in the request.
So in a typical GET request,
you're going to create some resource
and that resource is going to get called
with a method called HTTP_GET and that
method will get a request object with
it and it's going to do some processing,
probably read a file and render out some
HTML and then it's going to return a
response object or very likely a deferred
response object that then the server,
once that deferred fires,
will actually give a
response back to the client.
Twisted WebDAV is a submodule of Twisted
Web 2 and that implements WebDAV.
This was actually written by Apple,
me mostly, and contributed to the Twisted
project as part of open source stuff.
What's cool about Twisted WebDAV is that
it leverages all of the stuff that was
in Web 2 to do all the HTTP stuff and
then it adds in WebDAV functionality.
It supports WebDAV level 1,
which is all of your typical get, copy,
move methods, put,
which is actually an HTTP method,
but only WebDAV client
servers tend to implement it,
and all your regular WebDAV methods.
It supports WebDAV ACLs,
which is important for
the scheduling stuff,
as Cyrus was talking about.
You need to be able to grant
permissions to have certain kinds
of access on specific resources and
it implements that specification.
We're starting some work
on... WebDAV level 3,
which is the next revision of WebDAV is
actually in... being written right
now in its final forms and it's just
a small update to WebDAV level 1.
It does not support WebDAV level 2,
which is the lock and unlock methods.
So it's not really suitable for, say,
mounting in Finder,
but lock and unlock are
not required for CalDAV,
so we kind of skipped over that for
the time being in order to get the
calendaring implementation done.
And it does not support
all of WebDAV versioning.
It does support the report method,
which is specified in the versioning spec
because CalDAV needs a report method.
So Twisted CalDAV is a module that
builds on top of Twisted WebDAV,
which builds on Web2.
So you can see how this stuff
starts to layer fairly nicely.
You just start subclassing a lot.
And in this case,
we add all of the CalDAV functionality.
In particular,
we're implementing CalDAV access,
which means we have to implement
the make calendar method in order to
let you create calendar collections,
which are somewhat unique from
regular WebDAV collections.
It has a lot of business logic behind
it for doing calendaring operations.
So it has, of course,
an iCalendar parser and an iCalendar
generator so that when you edit stuff,
it can send you back useful data.
It supports all of the
CalDAV reports that Cyrus was
going through in his examples.
It supports the
read-free-busy ACL privilege,
which says that on a calendar collection,
I can grant somebody permission
to see whether I'm busy,
but without giving them permission
to actually read why I'm busy.
And that might be particularly important.
For a lot of us.
And it enforces good
behavior from clients.
So you can't like have some Yahoo crazy,
not Yahoo the website,
but some crazy client come in and
then start writing random data that
then confuses iCal or whatever other
clients that are well-behaved out there.
So if you try to write
JPEG information into what you're
claiming is an iCalendar file,
it's going to say, well, hold on,
that's not iCalendar data
and refuse the request.
It also implements CalDAV scares.
So it's a great tool for scheduling,
which means it does all of this inbox and
outbox fan out that Cyrus is describing.
You can park data into it.
It'll automatically forward it
along to other users and then
they can pick it up from there.
It supports all of the scheduling
requests and it knows about
itip and some of this logic.
Again,
it's all calendar and business logic.
So it's not just webDAV,
it's webDAV with some calendaring smarts.
It returns free busy
responses right away.
So it actually will when you schedule
and I want to know whether Skip is busy.
I look at his calendar.
The server actually reads all
of his scheduling information,
aggregates that into a free
busy response that's useful.
Again, if you have that privilege
and it shuttles it back to the
client that's requesting it.
And it has scheduling specific
access control privileges.
So you can, again,
the concern being that you
don't want calendar spam.
You don't want anybody to be able
to propose meetings with you.
You want to restrict that to some
subset of people that you know are sane.
So you can do that with ACLs.
So looking at the implementation,
you'll see that our data storage
is actually all file based.
There's no SQL massive database that
stores all this calendar information.
We're just writing
information out to file.
So the resource layout that you see in
your web server is actually what you see
on disk when you look at the data store.
And so it's a lot like managing a typical
Apache install or regular web server.
What's nice about that
is that it's simple.
If you want to just see what's going on,
you can see the into
the documents directory.
You can kind of poke around in there and
use tools like CAT and CP to manipulate
the data in there if you need to do that.
And you don't need special
database specific tools.
and that also has the advantage of giving
you like some flexibility in how you do
your backups and restores and the like.
Properties are stored in files as well.
They're stored as extended attributes.
So if you think webdap properties kind of
look and smell like extended attributes,
well, in our implementation, actually,
they are.
Now,
in order for the performance to be good,
because, again,
we want this to scale to a
fairly large organizational size,
we use SQLite databases to index that
information so that when we do a lookup,
rather than having to open 1,000
files that might be in your calendar,
we just say, well,
let's look up where the event
with this given UID lives.
And then we can just go straight
to that file or actually keeps
all of the time spans in there.
So if I want to find out all of the
events that are happening this month,
I can actually use a SQLite database
to kind of find which data is likely to
have that and narrow my search down and
then go straight to that set of files.
Um...
Account information,
that is which users exist,
which groups exist and which
resources such as rooms and
projectors and the like exist,
that all lives in open directory.
So you manage that using
regular open directory tools,
your work group manager,
your team's directory and all
of the great tools that come
out of the open directory team.
And that of course has the advantage of
being able to integrate with the rest of
your authentication and user management
systems throughout your business.
Again,
we use SQLite to cache some information
off of open directory so that we're not
making quite so many network requests
every time somebody comes in and says,
oh, I'd like to schedule with
somebody and I have to figure out,
oh, I don't know who that is,
let me go to open directory.
Well,
we remember some of that information
for a while so that we don't
have to keep doing these lookups.
Again, the SQLite databases are there
only for performance reasons.
So if for some reason
they're annoying you,
you think there might be a corrupt file,
you don't know what's going on,
you can just delete the file and next
time around it'll get regenerated.
These are all things that we can do.
And if you're not familiar with them,
you can just delete them.
Again, the server is configured using
open directory so you can use your
standard open directory tools.
The way this works is if you remember
the diagram that Cyrus had where you have
principles and then you have calendars,
the principles that are HTTP resources
that are actually backed by open
directory and not really primary on disk.
So we look up which users are
around on your directory system and
that's how we populate the users,
groups and resources parts
of the principle hierarchy.
But at the same time,
we figure that any user who's
got an account on the calendar
server also needs a calendar
collection so we also provision
out the calendaring information.
And again,
not all of your users in open directory
have to have calendar accounts.
You might want to only
have some subset of users.
You might create some users
that don't need calendaring.
And you can enable or disable that in.
So you can do that in the open directory
using one of the properties there.
Again, user authentication is done
via open directory so your
regular HTTP authentication
mechanism is hooked into that.
There's no crazy forms
based authentication,
fortunately.
And Kerberos authentication
is in progress.
iCal and the Leopard seed
doesn't support Kerberos auth,
but we plan to have that for Leopard and
so that'll fit into your single sign-on
strategy if you're using Kerberos.
So let's talk about the
actual implementation a bit.
First thing is you're going to
probably want to get some source code.
And the way you do
that is use Subversion.
In the Leopard Seed,
Subversion is built in.
Yay.
If you're using Tiger,
you can download it from some websites.
We have some information on
our site on how to do that.
But once you've got Subversion,
you can just do Subversion
Checkout of that URL there,
which is on Mac OS Forge,
and get your own handy dandy copy of the
calendar server as it is in development.
Once you've got the source code,
you can change the
directories into there,
copy one of the example
Director of Configuration Files
in your development environment.
In this case,
we're going to suggest you use
a static one so that you don't
have to also set up open directory
in order to test your server.
You can actually, in XML,
specify a set of users and just create
an admin account with the test password.
And then you run this shell
script that's in there called run.
And that will actually finish
up the rest of your downloads.
It's got to download a few
dependent libraries that we use.
And it knows whether to fetch the
right ones on Tiger versus Leopard.
And then it should get you started.
Now we've got a couple of kinks in
this I'm finding out from emails,
but this will be that easy by
the time I get home next week.
And then you've got a running
server so you can get Safari out,
you can connect to local host port
8008 which is the default HTTP port
we're using and then you can actually
poke around in it using your web
browser or you can launch iCal and
you can poke around at it using that.
So I mentioned that we're
dependent on some other software.
If there's anything you take home
from all of the stuff that Cyrus was
telling you about iCalendar and so
on is that it's pretty complicated to
implement all of the iCalendar logic
and you probably don't want to build
that yourself and neither did we,
so we stole a lot of code.
First of all, like I mentioned,
we use Twisted for our core
engine that drives the server.
We use a library called VObject,
which is written by one of the fellows
at the Open Source Applications
Foundation named Jeffrey,
and that deals with all of this
iCalendar parsing and generating,
which we fortunately don't
have to build ourselves.
Twisted requires a small bit
of the ZOAP framework called
ZOAP Interface in order to do some,
declare programming interfaces,
which is a feature that
Python doesn't provide.
We use PyXML to do all
of our XML generation.
If you're a web dev person,
you're doing a lot of XML processing,
so that's our engine for that.
We use DateUtil to do a lot of the
recurrence and date processing magic,
and VObject depends on that.
We use PyOpenSSL, which is a thin shim on
top of the OpenSSL library,
as I mentioned before,
which of course is written in C,
so we're actually binding to that.
Bobby Pulido wrote a small shim
to the extended application.
We use Attributes API that's in
Mac OS X and on Linux and on FreeBSD,
and so we use that to store
our web dev properties.
And we use PySQLite to store those
SQLite databases I was talking about.
So we're kind of a player
in a lot of little buckets.
And in order to implement
our open directory magic,
which stores all the
data in LDAP and so on,
and to do the Kerberos authentication,
we had to write a couple of more modules,
and that's PyKerberos
and PyOpenDirectory.
both also on the same source
repository as the calendar server.
Hopefully they're useful for things
outside of the calendar server as well.
So just briefly I'm going to go
over some of the classes that are
in the source code so that you
don't quite have to figure out
the architecture of it from zero.
This is actually a fairly
simplified version of what's
going on but it should give you an
idea of how we built the server.
So again,
Twisted Web 2 implements HTTP as
a collection of resources
which are instantiated.
So you've got a resource class
that's kind of a generic class and
knows how to do some basic HTTP.
operations.
And we have a static derivative of
that which knows how to do things
like generate an e-tag on the fly,
get you the last modified time,
just for resources that are not like
your CGI type dynamic resources.
And from that,
there's a file implementation.
So the file implementation, of course,
you send it a get request and
it's going to read some data
off of the disk and just shuttle
that back up to the protocol.
And that's a fairly simple,
typical web server right there.
In order to implement WebDAV,
we subclassed the static resource
into a DAV resource class and
that knows how to do a couple more
things that are specific to WebDAV.
In particular, it has a property store.
And that property store is
where the WebDAV property
information is going to live.
And our implementation of
that uses extended attributes,
as I mentioned.
That in turn is subclassed
in a class called DAV file.
Now you notice here there's
multiple inheritance.
So if you're terrified of that,
close your eyes.
But it's actually fairly straightforward.
We derive from the file class because
we want to read data off of the disk
and the file implementation does that
and we derive from DAV resource in
order to get some common web DAV logic.
And then of course, subclassing that for
CalDAV resource and CalDAV file,
we get the calendaring logic in there.
So you can see how this stuff kind
of layers very nicely from regular
HTTP processing down to WebDAV processing
and down to calendaring processing.
And there's some other classes in
there which do some WebDAV things
such as like there's a DAV principle
resource which knows how to instantiate
a principle and what that means and
you can authenticate against it.
And there's a file-based
implementation of that as well.
So you can see how all this
stuff kind of ties in together.
So hopefully like you guys are
excited about some of this stuff
and might want to tie it into
something that you're doing.
You might want to tie it to
some calendaring backends
that you've got already.
You might want to implement it
to control some other stuff.
Maybe you want to implement
a public event system,
some Evite type thing
without all the ads.
Or you want to run your sprinklers
at home or change your thermostat
settings while you're at work.
You can imagine that a calendar
server can kind of just bind
to these information systems
and kind of drive that stuff.
And so there's some cool stuff
that I think could be done there.
But also you can extend the
protocol which there's a lot of
interest in Atom right now because
Google Calendar is doing Atom for
subscribing to calendar information.
So you can imagine that we could just
put an Atom front end on top of that.
And then you can put a calendar
on top of the server in addition
to CalDAF so that you can use
those tools to talk to it as well.
We've obviously been getting a lot
of questions about legacy systems
and how you're going to tie into
those because it's open source.
You can actually replace the file
classes that I was showing you there.
Just swap those out with some data
store that instead stores to some
database or an existing database
or speaks network protocol to
some other calendaring system.
You can imagine a map back end that,
for example, speaks to Exchange.
change.
And then you might have other directory
systems that are not in open directory.
You're porting to Linux, for example,
and you don't have open
directory deployed.
So maybe you want to replace the
directory back end to use your
particular single sign-on strategy.
and the source code hopefully enables
you to do all of these things.
So if you want to learn more about this,
the website is
collaboration.macosforge.org.
That's a track installation so you
can actually file bugs in there.
You can kind of browse around
some documentation that we're
starting to bring online.
Hopefully the server is
a little happier now.
We were on Slashdot a couple
days ago and had the associated
downtime that comes along with that.
But the server seems to be behaving
pretty well lately so you should
be able to connect to this and
get some information out of there.
If you register on the thing
you can actually file bugs.
If you do not register you cannot
file bugs and that's because we want
a little less spam in our mailboxes.
And you can actually browse
the source code in there and
see how we're progressing.
There's a cool timeline feature
in track that lets you actually
see what wiki pages got edited,
which source commits changed.
And what tickets have been filed.
So you can actually see our
progress in a very useful view.
So if you want to learn more
about all of this information,
again if you want to learn about
the calendar server in particular,
you want to go to
collaboration.macosforge.org.
If you want to learn about Chandler,
which is OSAF's client,
you can go to chandler.osafoundation.org.
There's another CalDAV implementation
which is open source called Cosmo,
also from the OSA foundation.
Learn more about Twisted
at twistedmatrix.com.
And of course if you want
to learn about Python,
go to docs.python.org.
There's a lot of
specifications in play here.
Again, iCalendar's got some RFCs up
in there right now and there's
edits going on to updated drafts.
If you want to learn
about HTTP and WebDAV,
there are other RFCs to check out there.
And CalDAV is, if you go to CalDAV.org,
that'll redirect you to the proper
website for some CalDAV information.
Also, if you go to WebDAV.org,
you can learn about WebDAV.
And then, of course,
if you're at all interested in
this space and you want to be able
to drive some of these standards,
get involved with the calendaring
and scheduling consortium.
Again,
Apple's hosting the next interoperability
event in September on our campus.
Hopefully,
that's a sign that we're pretty
committed to the standards
process and take it from there.
And all of these URLs are
on the Mac OS Forge site,
so you don't have to keep scribbling.